Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, members of the Board of Public Works, justices of the Supreme Court of Appeals, members of the Legislature, distinguished guests, and my fellow West Virginians.Five years ago, when I first addressed this chamber as governor, Icalled onour state’s Legislature to get to work and put West Virginia first.Although many things have changed, including the makeup of this Legislature,our commitment to the people who call our beautiful state home has remained steadfast.Since 2011, we have createda number of new opportunities for future generations, and we have faced our fair share of challenging times.Tonight, ourstate is at a crossroads,and I stand before you with a plan that preserves the best of our past while charting a boldnew planfor our future.ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTSince 2011, we have welcomed more than 250 companiesand $10 billionin major investments, providing hardworking West Virginians with more 11,000 good-paying jobs. We’ve worked hard to createa business climate that makes West Virginia a strong competitor for major economic development projects. And we’re not just competing, we’re seeing hugesuccess.Nationally and internationally recognized companies like Macy’s, Amazon, Quad Graphics and Toyotaalready know that West Virginia is a great place to do business. And tonight, I’m proud to announce polymeradditivecompany Addivant has reaffirmed its commitment to our state and plans to expand. After receiving FDA approval for a groundbreaking polymerto beused in food packaging,the company was on the hunt for a new location to expand its production facility. Major players fromthe Gulf Coast actively pursued Addivant, but our state’s Development Office stepped up and showed company executives that West Virginia is the right place to invest. This new expansion project not only savesnearly 100 jobs, butitbrings at least $12 million in new investments and additional opportunities for employment. Plastics manufacturing is just one of the downstream industries we are working toattract,and thisexpansion projectis just the beginning of that growth.Addivantchose to stay in West Virginia because of our strong business climate and a highly trained experienced workforce that’s ready to get to work.These types of investments don’t happen overnight. They’re a result of the hard work and positive changes we’ve made over the years.

We overhauled workers’ compensation,and companies operating here have saved more than $323 millionsince the program was privatized in 2006. We’ve reformed medical malpractice and improved our legal climate. We’ve enacted gradual reductions in our business and consumer taxes,and since I took office, we’ve savedemployers and West Virginians more than $225 million.We rank higher than each of our neighboring states in this year’s Business Tax Climate Index.Companies are noticing these changes, and they are paying off in big ways in regions across the state.PROCTER & GAMBLEThis September, we joined officials from Procter & Gamble to celebrate the groundbreaking of the company’s newest manufacturing plant –the first of its kindbuilt in the United Statessince the 1970s. Projects of this size and scope strengthen our economy, create new jobs and serve as an investment in both our state and our people. This factory–located in the Eastern Panhandle –will create 1,000 jobs during theinitialconstruction phase. Once fully operational,it is projected to employ the company’s fifth largest workforce in the country.We’ve worked hard to bring these jobs to West Virginia forWest Virginians, and now,they need filled. That’s why more than a year before production begins,P&G has partnered with BlueRidge Community and Technical Collegeto create specialized training programsto meet workforce needs.These certificate and degree programs are preparing students for careers in engineering, computer science, and electronicsand training students to become skilled chemical operator technicians. BlueRidge President Dr. Peter Checkovich and his team areworking hard to make sure our students can compete for these good-paying jobs. P&Gconstruction managerLuisGutierrezis already working with crews on the ground as part of the company’s initial construction efforts. He and his family love calling West Virginiahome. Please join me in thanking Dr. Checkovichfor his continued efforts and welcoming Luisandhis family toWest Virginia.WORKFORCE TRAININGIn 2012, we launched a new workforce training program called Learn and Earn.

This program helps students receive classroom instruction and hands-on experience, while earning a competitive salary, andgives employers acost-effective wayto recruit and train new employees. We know this program is incredibly successful, and companies like Gestamp –which manufactures auto parts for some of the world’sbest known brands –aretaking advantage of thesetraining opportunities.SinceGestamp first opened in 2013, the South Charleston plant has tripled productionand more than doubled its total workforce. Today, Gestamp employs more than 700West Virginians. These are real jobs,and the company is alreadyseeing a real return-on-investment. Through a partnership with BridgeValley Community and Technical College, students can get hands-on training and earn a one-year certificate, an associate’s degree and a journeyman’s card.With us tonight arePaul Lezanic, Gestamp’s new plant manager, and Jamie Thompson,a Learn & Earn graduate who is already training 12 new students. Please join me in welcoming Paul to West Virginia and congratulating Jamie on his success.These partnerships are essential to helping those investing here train theworkforce they need to grow.Tonight,I’m introducing legislation to expand the Learn and Earn programstatewide by redirecting nearly $300,000of the current budgetto create new,valuable learning experiences for our students.We know we must do more to improve our state’s workforce participation rate. I’mproud that today there are more job training programs in place than ever before.  With the help of more than $40 millionin federal grant funding, Workforce West Virginia is helping coal miners, their familiesand those who have exhausted their unemployment benefits find careers in growing industries. These programs help employers train workers theirway at theirworksites and provide up to $5,000 in tuition assistance for classroom instruction and on-the-job training.NDRC/HOBETAs we recognize these efforts to train our workforce,I ask you to remember those who call our state’s southern coalfields home.As a son of these coalfields, I have dedicated my life and my years of public service to supportingour miners and their families. Despite the difficult times we find ourselves in,West Virginia remains the fourth largest producer of electricity in the country, and I believe our coal industry will continue to support ourfamilies well into the future.

However, we cannot ignore the unprecedented shift that has taken place in our state and our nation.Forces beyond our control have severely damaged our coal industry,and even the most optimistic among us realize itis unlikely coal will ever reach production levels of the past.For generations, our miners unearthed the coal used to produce the low-cost energy that fueledthis country’s Industrial Revolution –one that remains unmatched anywhere in the world.This nation owes these West Virginians a debt of gratitudeand we are readyto cash in on that substantial IOU. This fall, we submitted an application to the National Disaster Resilience Competitionseekingmorethan $140 millionin funding from the United StatesDepartment of Housing and Urban Development.This competition has the potential to help six counties in our southern coalfields adjust, adaptand advance their communities. If we’re successful,thesefederal funds will help us rebuild aging infrastructure,promote land use planningand hazard reduction efforts and stimulate housing and economic development in areas outside of the region’s floodplains.  We are also proposing to develop the largest industrial site in West Virginiahistory at the former Hobet surface mine in Boone and Lincoln counties.With 12,000 acres located just off Corridor G, this site is large enough to fit virtually every major economicdevelopment project in recent history–including Toyota,Procter & Gamble, Gestamp, Macy’s, Amazonand more–with thousands of acres left over.We know this is a major undertaking,and with the help oflocal landowners MarshallUniversity,West Virginia Universityand the Virginia Conservation LegacyFund, we are working together to find new uses forthis sitewhile mining activity continues.Please join me in welcoming this outstanding team:interim Marshall University PresidentGary White,new Marshall Universitypresident Jerry Gilbert, WVUPresident E. Gordon Gee, and Tom ClarkeandKen McCoyof the Virginia Conservation Legacy Fund.Tom and his teamat VCLFalso are helping us develop new and innovative ideas toinclude in the state’s Clean Power Plan submission. While the DEP continues to work on a feasibility study,we anticipate our final plan may include ideas such as reforestation and the replacement of boilers to increase power plant efficiency.Tom,thank you for your assistance on both of theseimportant projects.This is just the beginning of what we can do to help diversify the economy of not only this region, but our entire state. Whenpursuing large-scale projects,our talented team at the Development Office consistently runs into one major obstacle –alack of flat land. Redeveloped surface mine

lands offer endless opportunities for residential, commercial and industrial developmentand in many cases all three. As part of our federal grant application, we have identified at least five sites in each of Boone, Lincoln, Logan, Mingo, McDowell and Wyoming counties, whichare allstrong candidatesfor similar redevelopment efforts. Much like the country owes West Virginia for our contributions over the years, we–as West Virginians–owe the people who call this region home the opportunity todo better for themselves and their families.For years, taxes on the coal mined from our southern coalfields and the timber taken from our mountain sides have paid for our children’s schools, the roads our residents drive on and the services on which so many West Virginians rely. It’s time we reinvest in these communities and give these families every opportunity to make a good living in the places they have called home for generations.Tonight, I hope you will join me in making that commitment for the betterment of our state and our people.NATURAL GAS DEVELOPMENTSAs hardworking West Virginians continue to mine the coal that powers our nationanddrillfor the natural gas that offers newopportunitiesfor growth,we must guarantee these natural resources meet ourneeds here at home.As the ninth largest producer of natural gas in the country, we must work with those operating here to create the processing and pipeline infrastructure necessary to ensure this industry’s continued growth. The ongoing development of the Marcellus and Utica shale –and the Rogersville formation just being explored –is already bringing new revenues and new jobs for West Virginians.That’s one reason I sent a letter to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionin support of the Columbia Gas Mountaineer Xpress pipeline project.This $2billioninvestment will transport a significant amount of natural gasto new markets.Much like similar pipeline projectsby EQT, Dominionand Momentum Mid-Stream, this investment has the potential to create thousands of good paying construction jobs,while generating significant tax revenues forcounties to fund local schools, roads and other worthy endeavors.SELF-EMPLOYMENT ASSISTANCE ACTWhile these announcements grab headlines, we can’t forget our state’s small business owners who work day in and day out to support that same growth in our local

communities.Ninety-six percentof West Virginia’s employers are small business owners, and they are the backbone of our economy.While we work to help tens of thousands of West Virginians on unemployment find new opportunities to succeed, we can’t overlookthe training and skills they already have. That’s why tonight I’m introducing the Self-Employment Assistance Act, a new program tostrengthen our local economies, and make it easier for West Virginians receiving unemployment benefits to get the help theyneed to open a business.Starting a new business can be hard. No matter how great the idea may be or how hard the owner works to make it a success. With thisexemption,new business owners will be able to reinvest in their company andtheir employees, while continuing to receive unemployment benefits to support their families.For 14 years, Matt Dolinworked as a diesel mechanic at alocalcoal mine just outside of Charleston. When the mine closed, he lost his job.Matt knew he could earn a good income using the skills he already had, but he needed help starting his ownbusiness. Earlier this year, Matt attended a West Virginia Small Business Development Centerworkshop in Putnam County. He sat down withbusiness coach Bryan Shawto develop a business plan and find a good location forhis new venture. A few months ago, Matt opened D&D Truck Shop, a full-service diesel truck and heavy equipment repair shop. Not long after he opened, Matt hired his first two employees –two mechanics who worked alongsidehim at the coal mine.With the help of the Governor’s Guaranteed Workforce Program, Matt is in the process ofgetting additional support to train new employees.Although D&D Truck Shophasonly been open for a few months, Matt is seeing tremendous growth,and he’s already looking to expand. Matt, Caseyand Ronnie,please stand so we may recognize you and congratulate you on the success of your new business.SUBSTANCE ABUSEHelping our residents develop the skills tofind a new career is important, but keeping them off drugs is critical to our state’scontinued growth.Substance abuse has become one of the greatest struggles our state has ever faced,and it is destroying the lives of far too many of our family members, friends and neighbors.We must continue to make the fight against substance abuse a top priority.

In 2011,I established my Advisory Council on Substance Abuse to help us find more localized ways to combat this epidemic. Since then,we have updated our prescription drug monitoring program, cracked down on the sale of drugs used to make meth and put an end to doctor shopping.We have shut down pill mills for irresponsible prescription practices, and my administration is committed to continuingthe fight against drug companies that oversupply pain medication without proper orders. Last year,we invested significant state funding to expand critical substance abuse treatment and recovery services. In your seats tonight, you received a brochure that details 150 service providers in every region of the state. This brochure is available online and at local courthouses, hospitals, schools, churches, DHHR offices and libraries in all 55 counties.This September, we launched 844-HELP-4-W-V, the state’s first 24-hour substance abuse help line. This call line gives people the opportunity to speak with certified professionals andreceive referral support in their local communities. So far,thecall line has connected more than 700West Virginians with treatment and recovery services across the state.In October, I welcomedPresident Obama and DHHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell for an honest discussion about the devastating toll this epidemic is causing West Virginia families and communities. A few weeks later, I traveled to Martinsburg –what some consider ground zero of our state’s heroin epidemic –to host my own Substance Abuse Summit. We brought together a panel of West Virginians to share their experiences in the fight against substance abuse,recognize the progress we’ve made and identify ways we can work together to create a brighter,drug-free future for our residents.We want people to find helpand hope in West Virginia. And that starts with making sure treatment facilities are providing comprehensive care.Tonight, I’m introducing legislation to establish licensing requirements for medication-assisted treatment facilities. Research shows us that the use of Suboxone and Methadone alone does not support long-term recovery. These medications don’t treat the root cause of an addiction,and only continuethe addiction cycle. This legislation requires counseling and behavioral therapies be used in conjunctionwith these medicationsto make sure those seeking treatment have the support they need to begin the recovery process.Last year,I urged this Legislature to expand access to Narcan to help our state’s first responders, friends and familiesof those struggling with addictionreverse the effects of aheroin overdose.Since May, we’ve coordinatedtraining sessions in regions across the state to teach first responders and others how to administer this drug safely.Today, more than 100 people are certified to host these sessions in their local communities.

In 2015,first responders administered more than 3,000 doses of Narcan –giving those struggling with an opioid addiction the opportunity to get help. When an overdose happens, every second counts. And in many cases,fire and EMS crewsaren’t always first on the scene. This November, Patrolman Nick Castlemanand Patrolman Seth Johnsonfound themselves first on the scene of a drug overdose on Charleston’s West Side. The officers administered two life-saving dosesof Narcan,and withinminutes, the young man regained consciousnessand was transported to the emergency room for treatment.Patrolman Castleman and Patrolman Johnsonare with us tonight. Gentlemen, please stand so we may thank you for the work you do to keepour communitiessafe.This man’s life was saved because ofquick action by these officers, and our efforts to expand access to this life-saving drug.Tonight, I once againurge this Legislature to expand access to Narcan by supporting my proposal to make it available to any West Virginian –without a prescription.This new legislation requires pharmacists to become certifiedto train those who receive this drug to make sure they can safely administer itif a crisis occurs. It will also help us keep track of who is receiving Narcan to better focus state resources inareas hardest hit by opioid overdosesand be sure it isn’t being used as a crutch to enable a heroin addiction.JUVENILE JUSTICEWe know our state’s substance abuse epidemic is heartbreaking for so many of our families and communities,but in many cases, our childrensuffer most.That’swhy last year, followingrecommendations from my Commission on Juvenile Justice and with the help of this Legislature,we launched comprehensive juvenile justice reform. This legislative package provided$600,000 in new fundingto establish truancy diversion programs in each countyto offer early intervention to those studentswho need it. Since launching its own program in 2010, Putnam County has seen significant improvements in overall student attendance and achievement. Truancy referrals have dropped in half and four-year graduation rates have increased from 78 percent to 90 percentduring that same period.We knowthis program works, and it’s makinga difference for students like Winter Davis.

For most of her life,Winterdidn’t have a stable place to call home.From the time she was born, her parents struggled with substance abuse. She spent much ofher youth living with a family of no relation,helping to care for their young children and elderly family members.Between 2011 and 2012, Wintermissed 39 days of school.She got behind in herclasswork and was struggling to keep up with her classmates.With the help of Putnam County’s truancy diversion program, attendance director Jennifer Hodgesand Judge Phillip Stowers, Winter got the extra attention she needed and earned her high school diploma, graduating with a 3.7 GPA and zero unexcused absences.Today, Winter is a certified EMTand plans to become a teacher for children with special needsa dream that she’s had sincethe sixth grade. Winter shared part of her story with me and said, “Life was not easy for me, but I am making the best choices I can. I’m the only one in my family that has gone to collegeand I’m going to finish college no matter what it takes.”Ladies and gentlemen,please join me in welcoming WinterDavis,JenniferHodgesand Judge Stowers. These reforms have also expanded youth reporting centers to getkids help in their local communities, instead of sending them to group facilities away from their families.By connecting children and families with substance abuse recovery services,mentalhealth programs and functional family therapies, we are giving the whole family the opportunity to thrive.Thanks to the changes approved by this Legislature,and the work of our local partners across the state, we’ve reduced the number of kids being sent to out-of-home placements by more than one-third and reduced the number of detention beds by more than 40 percent.So far, we’ve saved $6 million and the Division of Juvenile Servicesis confident we can double that savings in the coming years. By providing our kids with the help they need at home, we’re giving them the opportunity to take advantage of the bright future we are creating here in West Virginia.EDUCATIONIn 2010, we started down a path to improve our state’s public education system.Instead of allowing paperwork to drive education, we refocused our efforts to provide our children with the skills they need to compete in today’s global economy. Since then, we’ve expanded early childhood education to helpour youngest students build a foundation for a lifetime of learning. We’re engaging middle school and high school students with hands-on training programs.

We’re breaking down bureaucratic silos between state agencies,providing a more seamless transition for students transferring betweencommunity and technical colleges and four-year institutions.These reforms –and the standards that come with them –are giving our kids the knowledge and skills they need to succeed, and that starts by making sure ourstudents are in the classroom for 180 days of instructional time. Over the past year, the delivery of public education in West Virginia has been used as a political football by members of both parties.It’s disappointing. It’s unacceptable. And it’s a disservice to our kids.At a time when comprehensive reform has led to real improvements,and our students are more competitive with their peers in other states, we need tobuild on thesesuccesses –notintroduce legislation that prioritizes summer vacations over a good education.We cannot allow politics or red tape to get in the way of providing our kids with a thorough and efficient education.While there are a number of reasons why traditional charter schools are notthe best option for our students, we can find common ground by rewarding schools for innovation and creativity while raisingstudent achievement.That’s why I’m introducing legislation to restructure thecurrent innovation zone system toestablisha newprogram –called Innovation in Education.This legislation reallocatesnearly$2.5millionin existing education funding to help schools develop new methods to increase our students’ interest in science, technology, engineering, math and entrepreneurship. By giving schools the flexibility to focus on these subjects, we can teach our students how tothink critically –a skill they need to be successful long after they’ve graduatedhigh school.BUDGET AND FINANCESAll of us in thischambertonight and those watching and listening across the stateknow we are experiencing budget challenges unseen in more than a generation.Nearly every agency andeverybranch of state government has shared in the burden ofthese reductions.In spite of those challenges,we are paying not onlyour current bills, but keepingevery financial commitment of the past, paying downourdebts inworkers’ compensation, teachers’ retirement and public employees’retirement. And we’ve done that withouta single tax increase, whilereducing tax burdens on West Virginia families and those doing business hereby hundreds of millions of dollars.

Tonight,I am introducing legislation to pay off our old workers’ compensation debtmore than a decadeahead of schedule. By accelerating this final payment,we can remove additionalseverance taxes on our coal and natural gas industries, providing much-needed relief to help them invest in our state and employ West Virginia workers.Whilehistoricallylow energy prices are good news when we fill up at the pump and pay our utility bills, theymake it hard on our state budget.As we work to find new ways to ensure our tax base is both stableand more diverse,we must also seriously consider new revenue opportunities.Tonight,I am introducing legislation to increase our state’s tobacco tax by 45 cents a pack to a total of one dollar.This increase will be considered too high bysome peopleand too low by others.But itstrikesa balance that protects retailers in our border counties and discourages our young people from smoking, while generatingnearly$71.5 millionannuallyin new revenue.Combined with savings from anew prescription drug contract,$43million of this new revenue will fund PEIA, meaning public employees will NOT SEEthedramatic benefit reductions initially proposed for the coming year.I also am proposing legislation to eliminate a sales tax exemption and bring our state’s telecommunications tax in line with 41 other states across the country.Once adopted, this legislation will place the same 6 percent sales tax on cell phone and phoneline usage–putting us in step with what is done inthe vast majority of other states. By eliminating this exemption,we can collectan extra$60 millioneach year.With these proposed changes –and despite low severancetax projections –the 2017 budget I present to you tonight uses no money, no money from our Rainy Day Fund and does not include anyacross-the-board budget cutsbeyond those already in place.In spite of thetight budget years of the past,our new six-year budget forecast shows surplusesof nearly $7millionin 2019, $89millionin2020 and $118millionin 2021.While I won’t be in officeto see these surpluses, I’m proud to have been part of more than 30 years of responsible fiscal policies that have put us on the path to a brighter financial future.CLOSINGAs we look ahead atthe challengeswe must overcome this year,we are reminded that West Virginians have never had it easy.But we have proved time and again, for generations,what has been true all along –the people who call our state home are among thebest and brightestin the world.

Clara Grant Santuccigrew up inwhat was oncea one room school house withher five brothers and sisters. ThisDoddridge County native spent her childhood like so many of West Virginia’s children –playing outside,caring for the family gardenand racing her brothers and sisters on her family’s gravel road.By high school, shewas breaking records and winning state track titles. Clara was determinedto run cross country for Coach Sean Clearyat WVU,and her hard work paid off. As a Mountaineer, she becamean All-American.In 2011,she ran the Boston Marathon. Clara finished16thoverall and was the 3rdAmerican finisher. And three years later, she madeher mark on the national stage –winningthe Pittsburgh Marathon with a time of 2 hours, 32 minutesand 25 seconds. Lastsummer, Clara returned to the PittsburghMarathon. For most of the race,she satin second place,but after catching sight of the leader, she found the mental toughnessto not onlywinfor the second year in a rowbuttofinish40 seconds ahead of her competition.This February, Clara will travel to the U.S. Olympic Trials in Los Angeles for a chance to compete for Team U.S.A. in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil.Katherine Johnson, who was born inWhite Sulphur Springs in 1918, would become what NASA Administrator Charles Boldencalled “one of the greatest minds everto grace our agency or our country.”For 33 years, she worked for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics,what is now knownas NASA. She used the most advanced practical mathematics of her day to chart and verify the path John Glenn would travel as he orbited the earth.In 1958,Katherine’s research focused on calculating margins of error for spacecraft take-offs and landings. The 34-page document was the first paper ever published by NASA’s Flight Research Divisionwith a woman’s name on it.Throughout her career, Katherine published 26 scientific papers. Her research was used to complete the Mercury and Apollo missionsand was critical to sending man into space and bringing him home safely.For decades, Katherine’s story was hidden inthe pages of history. This November she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, ourcountry’s highest civilian honor for her incredible contributions.In an interview with the Charleston Gazette-Mail, Katherine’s daughter Joylette Hylick–a former NASA scientist herself–said it was her mother’s quiet confidence that drove her to succeed.

Joylettetold the Gazette-Mail,“my granddaddy told my momshe was no better than anybody else, and she was no LESSthan anybody else. And she believed it.”Please join me as we celebrate the courage of these incredible West Virginiansand wish Clara the best of luckin next month’s Olympic trials.Whether a marathon runner, an unemployedminer, a NASA scientist, a single mother going back to school, a budding entrepreneur, the CEO of an international company or a recent graduate overcoming challenges to help her local community, West Virginians have always been willing to worktwice as hard and be twice as tough to get the job done.Over the next 60 daysand throughoutthe coming year, we know there is work to doanddifficult choices to make. Tonight,I challenge each of you to find the courage to make these decisions for the sake of the next generation –not the next election. It’s time to get to work.Thank you. God bless you,and God bless thegreatstate of West Virginia.
